---
date: '2020-01-06T21:03:56-07:00'
title: 'Tips for Successful Remote Meetings'
description:
    'Effective remote meetings don’t just happen. If you want them to work, you
    have to put in the effort.'
categories:
    - Work
tags:
    - remote
---

If you work at a tech company in 2020, chances are you've had some contact with
"remote work" in some form. Many companies fully embrace remote with completely
distributed teams, and many others are at least dipping their toes in the remote
waters by hiring some people outside the main office. Some companies pretend not
to be remote when they really are. (My opinion: if you have more than one office
space, you _are_ a remote company.)

Chances are also that you've been in your share of remote meetings, i.e.,
meetings where at least one participant was not physically present in the same
room as the others. I know I have been. At several different companies now, I've
been in lots of remote meetings. Some have been very effective, and some have
been downright awful. If there's one thing I've learned from these experiences,
it's that **good, effective remote meetings don't just happen automatically.
They take intentional planning and effort.** If you think that ducking into a
conference room and turning on your videoconferencing software makes for a good
meeting, I can pretty much guarantee that at least one person in that meeting is
having a terrible time.

In this article I want to share some tips that I have learned about how to
conduct a good remote meeting. Credit for most of these ideas go to the good
people at [Kuali](https://www.kuali.co/), one of my previous employers. Kuali
taught me how remote is done. They make a point of teaching these principles to
new employees, and they continually enforce them in company-wide meetings.

## Fair Warning

Some of these ideas may make you uncomfortable. You may chafe at them. But as I
said above, if you just do what is natural to you, you're probably not cutting
it. You may have to step outside of your comfort zone to make it work, but give
these tips a chance. They will pay off.

## Who This Is For

The tips in this article apply mainly to what I will call _imbalanced_ remote
meetings—that is, when most participants are physically present in the same
space, while a handful of others are elsewhere. That's because most of my
experience is from situations like that. Maybe most of your team members are in
your main office, while a few others are in a secondary office. Or maybe a
handful of team members work from home. This could even apply to temporary
situations, where someone has to work from home one day because they're helping
with kids or whatever. These things happen all the time.

If you work on a fully distributed team, with everyone working in their own
place, you might already be following a lot of these tips. But maybe you'll
learn something here too.

## Why Should You Care?

You may be wondering at this point why we're spending so much time talking about
this. The goal here is to help ensure that every participant in the meeting is
on equal footing. We want each participant to have an equal chance to contribute
and feel like a part of the team.

From the individual's perspective, a bad remote meeting can be a very isolating
and frustrating experience. They may feel like they're not being heard, and may
begin to wonder why they're even there.

From the company's perspective, meetings take a lot of resources, in terms of
the time taken by multiple people away from their regular work. It may be one of
the most expensive things a company does. If your remote team members are there
in the meeting but can't contribute fully because of the bad remote experience,
you are wasting company resources. You're also missing out on potentially great
ideas from remote participants.

We can do better.

## How to Start Caring Real Fast

If none of this resonates with you so far, try this experiment.

Pick a day, or maybe a handful of days, that has several meetings scheduled.
Arrange with your team or who ever you need to so that you can work from home on
those days. Attend the meetings remotely.

If your company hasn't given much thought to remote meetings, you'll see the
effects pretty quickly. You'll get frustrated, hopefully. You may even come up
with your own ideas for improvement that are similar to the ones here. Being
remote yourself will quickly generate empathy for remote team members. I think
everyone should try it.

All right, are you with me so far? Let's get into the tips.

---

## Before the Meeting
